-----------8<----- Cut here ------ ESCAPEB.TXT ------>8-------------------


-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-
                         Directions for Escape Beta
                            abridged and edited,
                     and probably wrong in many respects.

                         Courtesy of Tom Murphy.

-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-

          Version 1.9+ Beta

New in this version:
  þ New Graphics:
       ù Headphones guy for turning sound on/off
       ù Tiles graphic shrunk slightly, which speeds up loading
  þ New Features:
       ù Better level selection in Escape Campagin mode (retains position
                                                  of cursor)
       ù More messages in Escaped
       ù New random level AI in Escaped
       ù Filling in Escaped
       ù Ability to do 'overwriting' random levels
       ù Embarassing bug fixes (as usual!)
       ù Color title bug fixed by removing support for color titles (heh)
       ù Crash recovery fixed in Escaped
       ù New editing keys/features in Escaped
       ù Escape sped up when shelling from Escaped
       ù A new cheat in Escape, to be removed eventually
       ù Fixed PgUp and PgDn!
       ù The Record/Playback is working a little better now.
       ù Detects some more errors so Escape and Escaped won't crash out.
       ù You can delete invalid user names, though it will still crash
                                                                Escape.
       ù Protection against saving/loading to some devices.
Coming soon (maybe!):
  þ New tiles:
       ù One-way tiles
       ù More spaceship-looking background tiles (how long has it been now?)
       ù ???
  þ New Graphics:
       ù More characters
  þ New Features:
       ù A working XCAMP (campaign compiler) to make campaigns with
   X   ù Screen saver in Escape
   X   ù Sound Blaster (Adlib FM synthesis) support
   X   ù A rather shallow attempt to do music...
       ù Timed backup in Escaped
       ù Added 'level author' field to .ESC file format
       ù Better file selection in Escape/Escaped
       ù 12 more levels!
And now, the instructions:

ESCAPE.EXE is the game. Run it from DOS.

The first thing you'll have to do is pick a user. You can create a new
user by pressing "N" and delete an old one by pressing "D". Select the
one you want and press [ENTER]. Your progress on campaigns and your
character will be saved. (Note that if you create a new user, you must
give a valid DOS filename (8 characters or less)!  Also note that this
part doesn't work particularly well; it tends to crash a bit more than 
you'd desire. I'll fix it, but, be careful. =)

When you start, you'll get a menu, where you can either pick a 'campaign'
(whole bunch of levels stuck together) or an individual level, or change
your character. The characters are all the same other than the way they
look. To start, pick campaign mode.

There are now two campaigns, "Tutorial" and "Game". Game will not be the
one included in the game (and may include some registered-version-only
levels!), but you can play with it for the moment.

If you want to learn how the game works, load the campaign "tutorial.xcp".
It contains 11 levels which attempt to illustrate as best as possible how
each of the 35 or so blocks work.

If you're in for a challenge, try loading the "game" campaign. Some are
easy, but some are insanely difficult...

On the menu screen, you can use '3' to change your character. You can
also use the arrow keys to look at the four different directions. Right
now, the cast includes:
1. Midevil sort of warrior guy/girl.
2. Girl in a dress.
3. Computer programmer complete with tie and rolled up sleeves.
4. Um, err... a sort of yellowish circle thing. ;)
5. A guy with sunglasses and a sweatsuit... 'una-something-or-other' I think.

You can now load the files from the command line:
ESCAPE level

Remember not to give it the extension; it will add it automatically.
User #1 will automatically be selected (which happens to always be
'Nobody').

(Secret hint:

If you want to run the level from I'm-editing-in-Escaped-mode, where
[esc] will quit back to DOS and you will never be sent back to the
menu, do:

ESCAPE /play level

Which may or may not work.)

Playing:
Use the arrow keys to move the little guy (or girl, or... whatever) around 
the map. ENTER reloads the current level, "L" loads a new level (will 
prompt you at the top) and [ESC] returns to the menu. "C" will load a 
new campaign. You can hit "S" to toggle sound on and off (see the little
headphones guy? cool, eh?) You will notice that certain blocks can do 
certain things. Here is a brief description of each block:

1. Floor (empty) - This can be walked on, shot over, etc.
2. Red block - This can be pushed by the guy in any direction. It can be used
to push down panels (see later), or block lasers (see later) but it can't be
pushed in holes (see later...)
3. Blue block - Can't be pushed, moved, anything. A wall.
4. Grey block - Same as a red block, but can be pushed into holes.
5. Green block - Can be moved one space in any direction, and then turns into
a blue block. Must be pushed onto a floor (#1).
6. Exit Door - The player must touch this to exit (win). There can be more
than one on any given level.
7. Hole - Blocks the player from moving, but doesn't block lasers. You can
push a grey block into the hole, and it (and the block) will disappear.
8. Gold Block - This block can be pushed from any side, and will keep moving
until it hits anything but a panel or regular floor. It can push down panels
if it lands on them, and can block lasers, but can't be pushed into holes.
9. Shooter - If the player walks onto a space aligned (vertically or
horizontally) with this tile, they will be shot with a laser and they'll
die. Lasers can be blocked by anything but panels, floors, holes, and
electric floors.
10. Panels (grey circle on floor) - When the player or a block is on top of
one of these, another block somewhere will disappear. When the player steps
off, or the block is removed, the block will reappear. You can do some
neat stuff with these (including screwing up the game); play around with
them.
11. Stop Sign - Usually used to signify a block which can be removed with
a panel, but it acts exactly the same as 3 (a stationary wall).
12-15. Arrows - These are walls, which can be used for decorative purposes
or to hint what is to be done in a level. Exactly the same as #3 except the
way they look.
New stuff:
16. Rough (bumpy grey) - These can be walked on like normal floors, and
lasers can shoot over them, but blocks cannot be pushed on them.
17. Electric floor (yellow floor) - This cannot be walked on, but if a
block is pushed onto it, the block will be desintegrated. These floors
are shut off by #18, and can be shot over by a laser.
18. Electric button (on) - Pressing (touching) this will turn it into
#19 and turn all the #17s into #1s. Cannot be shot over, walked on,
etc.
19. Electric button (off) This is simply the off version of #18. It acts
exactly the same as #3.
20. Transporter - Stepping on this tile will send you to another space on
the level. Blocks lasers, pushable blocks, etc. etc.
21. Breakable (cracked grey) - Touching this block will cause it to
desintegrate and disappear.
22, 23: Horizontal/Vertical sliders - These blocks can only be pushed
in the directions that their arrows point. They can be used to block lasers
but cannot push down panels or fill in holes.
24, 25: 0 and 1 buttons - When one of these is pressed, all of the
horizontal sliders will be turned into vertical sliders, and all of the
vertical sliders will be turned into horizontal sliders. 
26-31: Wires - These wires conduct pulses from #32 (buttons) to the lights
(33-35). They only conduct in certain directions (the directions which
the conduit points in... I guess this is pretty obvious.) They can be
pushed and act identically to red blocks.
32: Pulse button - Pushing this will send pulses in all 4 directions, which
can travel down wires to lights or directly to the lights themselves.
Cannot be moved, but blocks the lasers.
33-35: Blue, red and green lights - These blocks, when sent an electric
pulse, will toggle their respective floors between the 'high' and 'low'
positions. They cannot be activated on their own, and are otherwise
stationary and solid.
36, 38, 40: Blue, red and green 'high' floor - This is basically a wall.
You can't walk over it or shoot through it. It can be toggled to the 'low'
position by sending an electric impulse to the same color light.
37, 39, 41: Blue, red and green 'low' floor - Can be walked over and shot
over, but blocks can't be pushed on it. Can be toggled to 'high' floor.

An admittedly better way to learn these tiles is to simply play the
campaign "tutorial". It tries to explain them taking a more pragmatic (and
more fun) approach. =)

(Oh, there is a built-in cheat function... press alt-z to clear the tiles
immediately adjacent to you; this is basically to make it easier to test
your levels, and will be taken out for the release version of the game. It
will also sometimes cause problems... careful. There's another one too now...
hit Alt-X and enter coordinates to warp to a spot on the level. It will
not un-press buttons, so careful!)

If you want to experiment with the playback/record functions:
Alt-R starts recording
Alt-P plays back
Alt-S toggle step-playback mode
They are less broken than before but still quite broken. Use at your own
risk!

                                  úþùþú

ESCAPED.EXE is the level editor.

You need a mouse.

Okay, now you can click on the little "menu" of tiles at the top with
the left mouse button. The currently selected tile will still be displayed
in the top left corner. To switch between the two rows of tiles (menus),
press the right mouse button on the tile menu or use the up and down
arrow keys.

The spacebar places the starting position for the guy, which defaults to
the lower left-hand corner of the screen. I've now fixed the bug *phew*
where you had to put the guy every time before you saved it.

Ummm, escaped is pretty self-explanatory, except for a couple things:

When you put down a panel (a floor with a grey circle on it), you have to
pick its destination tile. This is the tile that disappears when you step on
the panel or push a block onto it. A message at the bottom of the screen
which says something like "Click on destination tile" will appear, and you
should click on whatever tile you want to be the destination. Don't click
on the tile menu. If you screw up, or want to change the destination, simply
put another panel over the last one, and pick the new destination. The
destination is cleared automatically if you put a blank tile over a panel.
You also have to do this with transporter tiles now. The destination is
the space where it sends the guy. Careful with doing screwy stuff like
sending the guy off the screen... that's your fault, not mine. ;)

The right mouse button, while on the level area (and not the 'menu' up top)
will now conveniently erase (place tile #1 over) what's there.

Now, if you move the mouse pointer over a transporter or panel, a white
square will appear around its destination. Handy!

You can use the UP and DOWN arrow keys to scroll through the menu of tiles
on the top; the same as clicking on it with the right mouse button.

Use the "T" key to title the level. 24 (?) character limit.

Press "L" to load up a saved level.

Press "S" to save the current level. (loaded filename or filename with
"Save As" used)

Press "A" to Save As the current level (give it a filename other than the
one you gave before or loaded).

Alt-M will shell "cdplay", so if you have a program for playing
CDs (or anything else), you can make a batch file called cdplay.bat and
put it in the directory, and run it with alt-m. I did this mainly
for myself, and it will be almost certainly taken out in the release
version.

The following has been temporarily (I hope) removed:
-Pressing Alt-1 or waiting for 2 minutes without doing anything will pop
-up the screensaver (a sort of TV "snow" effect). Press any key to go
-back to the game.

Every minute or two an unsolicited message will appear on the bottom of 
the screen, reminding you of commands and things. You can disable these 
by pressing "M". You can also make them appear without waiting by pressing
"." (period).


Press [esc] or "Q" to quit and save. 
Please enter valid filenames only! Escaped will crash (now there is crash
recovery so you won't lose your work) if you do not.

The numbers 0-9 will set the Random Level AI type. (Types 1-4 exist right
now). These are used in conjunction with "R", which creates a random
level for you (be advised that it clears your current level!). Note that
these levels are not necessarily solvable, in fact they usually won't
have an exit, but they have some degree of intelligence to them (except
for type 1). They are useful to get you started.

Pressing "E" will designate whether this random level will 'overwrite'
the old one or not. It defaults to doing so. Play with it both ways to
see what I mean.

Pressing "F" will fill the level with your currently selected tile (unless
it is a panel or transporter, for obvious reasons). Not particularly
useful, really, but can be used in conjunction with "E" and "R" to
use different backgrounds for the random levels.

Enter now redraws the screen.

Test your levels, and then have someone else test them too! There is often a
much easier way of completing the level which you have overlooked.

Some level creating strategies:

1. Create a reasonably easy level which is solvable, then obfuscate it,
keeping it solvable. Add dead ends and distracting blocks...

2. Work backwards. Start with the guy at the exit, then work backwards. For
instance, you can put down a hole and then a grey block behind it... move the
guy backwards, dragging the block (mentally...) until it is in some other
position, etc. etc. This ensures a solvable level and they can get pretty
complicated. (I am thinking about making an automated level-creator using
this method... *ponder*)

3. Make a simple level, and then solve it. Whatever way you solved it, edit
the level again to make that particular route impossible. Keep going until it
is sufficiently difficult (but still solvable!)

4. Use different sorts of random levels. If you don't like the AI, you can
always close your eyes and spray tiles everywhere yourself! =)

SENDING LEVELS:

If you want to send me or a friend a level you made (don't wantonly 
distribute Escape Beta yet, though), you can now use the included
XENCODE and XDECODE programs.

To encode one level into a mailable .TXT file:

XENCODE level

To encode multiple levels into a single .TXT file:

XENCODE output level1 level2 level3 level4
(etc. etc.)

You should then cut and paste this output file into an e-mail message and
send it to me. (ImightbeTM@aol.com)

If you receive a level in an e-mail, save the e-mail to disk (Usually under
"File"/"Save As"), preferably with the .TXT extension. Then run XDECODE:

XDECODE mail.txt
or just
XDECODE mail

XDECODE will extract all the files it finds in a given text file, and you
need not remove headers nor other text in the e-mail (it will search out
the levels on its own).

I believe I have tested these pretty well and have made them more or
less user-proof, so if you find any problems or bugs, please send them
my way. Also please send your levels!

I want:

 þ Levels! Tough ones especially... if I use any of the levels you make,
you'll get your name in the credits, plus the deep satisfaction of having
other people become extremely frustrated at your creation and wish to kill
you.

 þ Bug reports! Now that this is the Beta version, I'm starting to weed
out some of the bugs and to user-proof it. If you find any bugs, send them
my way! But just so we're not redundant, see the known bug list at the end of
this file...

 þ Suggestions for new tiles! Not incredibly difficult-to-implement tiles, 
but something clever and versatile. I may not be adding new tiles for a 
while because I'm concentrating on making levels and user-proofing it, but 
I definitely appreciate suggestions and... you never know. =)

 þ Other suggestions! Send me other suggestions and comments! This game
is still in the works and nothing is definite. Even if I don't directly
implement your suggestion, it may become part of a future version or even
a future game! In any case, I appreciate hearing feedback and I'm very
friendly. =)

 þ Spoons! I am always looking for more spoons of any kind. Send them to:

Tom Murphy VII
The Spoon Campaign
339 Still Hill Rd.
Hamden, CT 06518.1830
USA

Thank you very much for participating in the Escape Beta project! =)

 - Tom Murphy.

 ImightbeTM@aol.com

Known bugs:
 ù Invalid filenames will often cause it to crash.
 ù XENCODE/XDECODE doesn't seem to be able to send tutorial.xcp. hmmm.
 ù Loading up files which aren't Escape levels will screw things up.
 ù Certain maneuvers can make your character temporarily disappear.
 ù Record/Playback sometimes don't work. I would appreciate if you can
     give me step-by-step ways to break this, however.
 -----------8<----- Cut here ------ ESCAPEB.TXT ------>8-------------------

