               ‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‹           ‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‹           ‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‹‹ 
     €€€€€€€€€ €         € €€€€€€€€€ €         € €€€€€€€€€ €         €
     €€€       €   €€€€€€€ €€€       €   €€€   € €€€   €€€ €   €€€€€€€
     €€€€€€    €         € €€€       €         € €€€€€€€€€ €      €€€€
     €€€       €€€€€€€   € €€€       €   €€€   € €€€       €   €€€€€€€
     €€€€€€€€€ €         € €€€€€€€€€ €   €€€   € €€€       €         €
               ﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂ           ﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂ           ﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂ
                                Version 1.0

                               First Release

                       Copyright (c) 1996 Tom Murphy
                            All rights reserved.

                               19 August 1996

Note: Please read this file with a monospaced ASCII font. Dos EDIT works
nicely, or use the accompanying T.COM (type T escape.doc).

     Well, Escape is feeling done, sort of. This is the first release
version, so don't expect everything to work perfectly, though I have
done a lot of testing and things should be ok. If you find any bugs at
all in this version please do send them my way.

                                                  €ﬂﬂ€ﬂﬂﬂ€ﬂﬂ€ﬂﬂﬂ€
If you're a computer wiz and don't want to read   € ﬂ€ ﬂ € ﬂ€€ €€
the installation and basic instructions, skip to  € €€ € €ﬂ €€ €€
the part where this appears:                      ﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂ
                                                 €ﬂ ﬂ€ﬂ €ﬂ€ €ﬂ€ ﬂ€ﬂ
                                                 ﬂ€  €  €ﬂ€ €ﬂ‹  €
                                                 ﬂﬂ  ﬂ  ﬂ ﬂ ﬂ ﬂ  ﬂ
                          (This is just a trick. This never appears.
                          get off your high horse and read the docs
                            like everyone else!)

     ‹‹ ‹‹ ‹‹
  ‹  €‹ €‹ €   ‹    What is Escape?               
     €‹ ‹€ €‹


     Escape is a fun VGA puzzle game for PC compatible computers. It is
rather detailed and engaging, does not force you to solve the puzzles
in any particular order, and allows the user to create his or her own
levels. (And much more!)

 €€€€ﬂﬂ€ﬂﬂ€ﬂﬂ€€€€
 €ﬂ€€ ﬂ€ ﬂ€ €€€ﬂ€   What does it need?
 €€€€ ﬂ€ﬂ € ﬂ€€€€
 ﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂ
     Escape needs very little to run. A 286 with 1 meg of ram and VGA
will do it. The game will run off a 1.44 mb floppy disk. However, Escape
was not designed to be run on slower computers. Speed will not make the
game impossible to play, but will make the screen display and disk access
much slower, decreasing the overall quality of gameplay. This is the
recommended configuration:

 ˛ 486 dx/33 or better processor.
 ˛ 4 mb of ram (8 mb for running under Win 95)
 ˛ PC Speaker
 ˛ Microsoft compatible mouse
 ˛ VGA (320x200x256)

     Escape runs OK in Windows 95, provided you run it in a full screen
DOS window. You do NOT have to "restart the computer in MS-DOS mode" to
play.

     Escape may run fine in Win 3.x, but it is severely discouraged.
Please exit Windows to DOS (not a DOS shell) before playing.

     ‹‹ ‹‹ ‹‹        
  ‹  €‹ €‹ €   ‹    Okay, how do I play?
     €‹ ‹€ €‹
     
     First you'll need to decompress the archive. You should not be
reading this file if the archive is not already expanded, so it is safe
to assume that this is already done. Once this is done, you can play
the game.

 ˛ This game was not designed to be run under Windows 95. It uses very
few system resources and so should run perfectly well, and it does,
but be advised that it will always run better without interruption and
from DOS. The recommended way to launch the game is from a full-screen
DOS window. (You can use the file manager too, but then you can't use
command line switches.)

So run Escape.exe. DOS users type:

ESCAPE

While in the proper escape directory, of course (for example C:\ESCAPE\
if that is where you decompressed it to).

     Once the game starts, the first thing you'll have to do is pick a
user. You can create a new user by pressing "N" and delete an old one by
pressing "D". Select the one you want and press [ENTER]. Your progress on
campaigns and your character will be saved. (Note that if you create a new
user, you must give a valid DOS filename (8 characters or less)! If you
enter a bad filename, Escape will either truncate it or make you start
over. You do not need to make your own user to play the game, though
if more than one person will probably be playing the game, your best
bet is to make separate users to keep track of progress separately.

     When you start, you'll get a menu, where you can either pick a
'campaign' (whole bunch of levels stuck together) or an individual level,
or change your character. You chose these options by pressing the numbers
next to them (press 3 to change your character, for example). The characters
are all the same other than the way they look. To start, pick campaign mode.

     There are several campaigns included with the game, but you should
start with "tutorial". Type in Tutorial and press enter.

     Tutorial is the Escape tutorial. It contains 11 levels which attempt
to illustrate as best as possible how each of the 35 or so blocks work. You
should try to complete all of these levels before moving on to the actual
game. If you have trouble completing them, you can read the list of tiles
and what they do, or the solution list for the tutorials.

     On the campaign menu, you are shown a list of level titles. Navigate
the menu with the arrow keys and PgDn/PgUp, and press Enter to start a
level. Levels which have been beaten by the current user will have an
asterisk (*) next to them.

     In the game, you move your character around with the arrow keys. You
can restart the level by pressing [Enter], or quit by pressing [ESC]. Sound
is toggled with "S", and a little icon is displayed in the lower right-hand
corner to indicate the current status of the sound.

     The tutorial attempts to nonverbally show you how the game is played,
so theoretically I could leave you with just this information and you would
have enough to learn. So, for those who have particularly big puzzle-
solving egos, feel free to go play at this point. But come back when you're
ready and read about Escaped, the Escape level editor.

If you are having trouble, please see the end of this document with the
tile descriptions and tutorial walkthrough.

 €€€€ﬂﬂ€ﬂﬂ€ﬂﬂ€€€€
 €ﬂ€€ ﬂ€ ﬂ€ €€€ﬂ€   For advanced users... (novices should skip to the
 €€€€ ﬂ€ﬂ € ﬂ€€€€             next section which covers the level editor,
 ﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂ             Escaped)

     You can load individual files from the command line:

          ESCAPE level

     These levels end in .esc, and are created with the included level
editor, Escaped. User #1 (which is always "Nobody") will automatically be
selected.

     These are the extensions used for Escape data files:

          .XCP - Escape Campaign file. (ex Tutorial.xcp)
          .ESC - Escape Individual Level. (ex frog.esc)

     While playing a level, "L" will load a new level, and "C" will load
a new campaign.


     For really advanced stuff, see the official Escape web page at:

http://members.aol.com/vroomfonde/escape

     ‹‹ ‹‹ ‹‹       I'm frustrated with these levels, so I want to 
  ‹  €‹ €‹ €   ‹    make others suffer with my OWN levels. How do I
     €‹ ‹€ €‹       use Escaped?
                     

     ESCAPED.EXE is the level editor.

     The requirements for Escaped are slightly more than Escape; a
Microsoft compatible mouse is required. I would also highly recommend
a small knowledge of DOS, for navigating and moving files that you
create. You can also do this through the File Manager in Windows 95.

     Run ESCAPED.EXE through DOS (or click on it in File Manager).

     If you want to save some time, you can load an existing level
automatically on the command line, like so:

          ESCAPED frog

     The level frog.esc has to have already been created for this to
work.

     You should now be on the Escaped editor screen (no fancy menus this
time!). Escaped was designed to be easy to use, yet let users take full
advantage of all the tile functions. This is the same level editor which
was used to make all of the levels included with Escape.

 €€€€ﬂﬂ€ﬂﬂ€ﬂﬂ€€€€
 €ﬂ€€ ﬂ€ ﬂ€ €€€ﬂ€   Okay, but how do I USE it?
 €€€€ ﬂ€ﬂ € ﬂ€€€€             
 ﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂ             

     Using Escaped is simple. The left mouse button "draws" on the tile
grid with the currently selected tile. The right mouse button will "erase";
that is, draw standard grey floor.

     The currently selected tile is displayed in the very top-left corner,
next to the tile menu bar. When you first start the program, this will
be tile #3, the blue wall.

     To select a new tile to draw with, simply left-click on it in the tile
menu. It should appear in the top left corner.

     You may notice that the menu only displays 17 tiles, and yet there
are 41 in the game (No, this is not a crippled unregistered version *wink*).
You can rotate through the menus to use the rest of the tiles by clicking
with the right mouse button on the tile menu. You can also use the Up and
Down arrows on the keyboard.

     Two of the tiles are special tiles: Panels (the dark grey circle on
the floor) and Transporters. When these are placed on the grid, the
status line on the bottom of the screen will read "Set Destination".
The next left click of the mouse will set the destination of this tile.
For panels, this means the tile that disappears when you step on it. For
transporters, this means the location where it sends your character when
you step into it.

     After setting the destination of a panel or transporter, subsequently
moving the mouse over that tile will cause a white outline to be drawn
around the destination tile. If you want to change the destination of a
panel or transporter, simply put another transporter or panel on top of it,
and set the new destination. Erasing or putting a normal tile in that
space will remove the destination tag automatically.

     The spacebar places the starting position for your character, which
defaults to the (almost) lower left-hand corner of the screen. You can
start your character anywhere on the map.

     Use the "T" key to title the level. If the level already had a title,
it will appear for editing, otherwise you should make one up and type it
in. There is about a 24 character limit (I think).

     Press "L" to load up a previously saved level.

     Press "S" to save the current level. If you haven't given the level
a filename yet, it will prompt you as if you had hit "A" for Save As.
Filenames are normal DOS filenames - up to eight characters, letters and
numbers only. Do not add an extension; escape will add the .ESC extension
automatically.

     Press "A" to 'Save As' the current level (to give it a filename other
than the one you gave before or loaded). Subsequent "S"aves will use this
filename.

     Press "P" to test your level. Test it a lot. Hit [esc] when you're
testing to return to the game.

     Press [esc] or "Q" to quit and save. If the level has changed since
the last save, you will be shown a text representation of the level and
asked if you want to save it. If you do, then hit "Y" and enter a filename.

     ‹‹ ‹‹ ‹‹       
  ‹  €‹ €‹ €   ‹    What is this "Crash Recovery" deal? 
     €‹ ‹€ €‹       

     If you enter an invalid filename or something else to crash Escaped,
it will often save your work in a file called CRASHxxx.ESC, where xxx is
a 3 digit number. You can load up this level again and save it as whatever
you like.

 €€€€ﬂﬂ€ﬂﬂ€ﬂﬂ€€€€   Ha! This is all too easy for me! I want some advanced
 €ﬂ€€ ﬂ€ ﬂ€ €€€ﬂ€             stuff! (Novice users should skip to the
 €€€€ ﬂ€ﬂ € ﬂ€€€€             next section, on XENCODE/XDECODE, or the
 ﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂ             section on Escaped level creation tips)

     The numbers 0-9 will set the Random Level AI type. (Types 1-4 exist
right now). You should look at them to see what they do. (0 and 5-9
just clear the level)

     These are used in conjunction with "R", which creates a random
level for you (be advised that it clears your current level!). Note that
these levels are not necessarily solvable, in fact they usually won't
have an exit, but they have some degree of intelligence to them (except
for type 1). They are mainly designed to give you a starting point to
get the creative juices flowing, so to speak.

     Pressing "E" will designate whether this random level will 'overwrite'
the old one or not. It defaults to doing so. This is difficult to explain
so play with it both ways to see what I mean.

     Pressing "F" will fill the level with your currently selected tile
(unless it is a panel or transporter, for obvious reasons). Not
particularly useful, really, but can be used in conjunction with "E" and
"R" to use different backgrounds for the random levels.

     Every minute or two an unsolicited message will appear on the bottom
of the screen, reminding you of commands and things. You can disable these 
by pressing "M". You can also make them appear without waiting by pressing
"." (period).

     Alt-M will shell "cdplay", so if you have a program for playing
CDs (or anything else), you can make a batch file called cdplay.bat and
put it in the directory, and run it with alt-m. If you want it to do
a normal DOS shell, make the cdplay.bat just say one line, "command".
I was going to take this out of the editor but now I think it might come
in handy.

     [Enter] redraws the screen.

     ‹‹ ‹‹ ‹‹       
  ‹  €‹ €‹ €   ‹    I suck at this! How do I make good levels?
     €‹ ‹€ €‹       


     Test your levels, and then have someone else test them too! There
is often a much easier way of completing the level which you have
overlooked.

     Here are some level creating strategies:

1. Create a reasonably easy level which is solvable, then obfuscate it,
keeping it solvable. Add dead ends and distracting blocks...

2. Work backwards. Start with the guy at the exit, then work backwards. For
instance, you can put down a hole and then a grey block behind it... move the
guy backwards, dragging the block (mentally...) until it is in some other
position, etc. etc. This ensures a solvable level and they can get pretty
complicated. 

3. Make a simple level, and then solve it. Whatever way you solved it, edit
the level again to make that particular route impossible. Keep going until it
is sufficiently difficult (but still solvable!)

4. Use different sorts of random levels. If you don't like the AI, you can
always close your eyes and spray tiles everywhere yourself! =)

 €€€€ﬂﬂ€ﬂﬂ€ﬂﬂ€€€€   
 €ﬂ€€ ﬂ€ ﬂ€ €€€ﬂ€   What are these XENCODE and XDECODE programs? Frankly
 €€€€ ﬂ€ﬂ € ﬂ€€€€             they scare me.
 ﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂ   

     What good is making levels if other people can't play them? I have
included the XENCODE and XDECODE programs with each copy of Escape as
a standard way of sending levels through electronic mail. They are
easy to use, and should be compatible with just about any mail program.

     Now would be a good time to mention that I would love to receive
your levels. Please, if you make any, mail them to ImightbeTM@aol.com.
Please see SENDLEV.TXT for more information on sending your levels to
me.

     ‹‹ ‹‹ ‹‹       
  ‹  €‹ €‹ €   ‹    Let's start with XENCODE, ok?
     €‹ ‹€ €‹       

     Okay. XENCODE is used to encode Escape levels so they can be sent
via electronic mail.

     To encode one level into a mailable .TXT file:

          XENCODE level

     (the output file will have the same filename as the level, and
the .TXT extension)

     To encode multiple levels into a single .TXT file:

          XENCODE output level1 level2 level3 level4
          (etc. etc.)

     (levels will be output to output.txt)

     XENCODE assumes the extension .ESC, which is the normal Escape level
extension, for the input file(s) if you do not specify one. The output
extension defaults to .TXT. This text file should then be pasted into
your e-mail message.

     Generally the way you paste is to do the following (for Windows
mail programs):

     Open up the text file in windows notepad. Highlight the contents
and press ctrl-ins (or select Edit/Copy). Put the cursor in your mail
window and select Paste from the Edit menu. The Escape level can
appear anywhere in the mail, and can be accompanied by text.

 €€€€ﬂﬂ€ﬂﬂ€ﬂﬂ€€€€       
 €ﬂ€€ ﬂ€ ﬂ€ €€€ﬂ€   Okay, great, what about XDECODE?
 €€€€ ﬂ€ﬂ € ﬂ€€€€             
 ﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂ   

     XDECODE is used to decode XENCODED levels received via e-mail.

     If you receive a level in an e-mail, save the e-mail to disk (Usually
in the menu under "File" and then "Save As") in the Escape directory,
preferably with the .TXT extension. Then run XDECODE:

          XDECODE mail.txt

     or just

          XDECODE mail

     XDECODE will extract all the files it finds in a given text file,
and you need not remove headers nor other text in the e-mail (it will
search out the levels on its own).

     ‹‹ ‹‹ ‹‹       
  ‹  €‹ €‹ €   ‹    How do I contact you?
     €‹ ‹€ €‹       

     I can be contacted in the following places:

          Tom Murphy 7
          Re: Escape 1.0
          339 Still Hill Rd.
          Hamden, CT, 06518.1830
          USA

          ImightbeTM@aol.com

          On irc as "Frood", usually on irc.qnet.com.

          http://members.aol.com/imightbetm

          Please don't forget to visit the Escape Web Page for info and
               levels and stuff:
                    http://members.aol.com/vroomfonde/escape

 €€€€ﬂﬂ€ﬂﬂ€ﬂﬂ€€€€       
 €ﬂ€€ ﬂ€ ﬂ€ €€€ﬂ€   What about registration and other legal stuff?
 €€€€ ﬂ€ﬂ € ﬂ€€€€             
 ﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂ   

     Escape is shareware. This means that you're allowed to play it,
and if you like it, buy it.

     However, I want Escape to be fun and popular more than I want to
make money off of it. For this reason I have set a rather low registration
fee, and I have given you a fully functional version with the editor
and everything.

     If you want me to set a "trial" period, I'll say 42 days. Use Escape
all you want for 42 days. After 42 days (or sooner if you like), decide if
you want to pay me five dollars to register. If you do, then see the
information below. If you don't want to register, don't. I would rather
think that someone is registering my program because they actually like it,
rather than because they are legally bound to. (Though you are, by the way.
*evil laughter*)

     If you register, you get the following stuff:

     1. A disk (or disks) in the mail with the following:
          a. Escape and all of it's component parts, registered.
          b. The 50 level registered campaign.
          c. The entire Escape User Level Archive*.
          d. XCAMP, a utility for creating your own campaigns.
          e. Many other Mooseware games and utilities.
     2. Other bonus prizes and special goodies.
     3. My esteemed thanks and obsequious technical support.
     4. A nice warm vibraty feeling all through your gutty-wuts.

     Registration is ONLY $5.00 US currency. Please make checks out to
Tom Murphy, and don't forget to mention that you want Escape and not
some other game.

     * The Escape User Level Archive is freeware, and consists of levels
which Escape players have submitted. So note that it is not being sold,
it is included for FREE. Anyone else can get the Archive by sending
a self-addressed-stamped-disk mailer and blank disk to the address above.
(you will also want to write somewhere that you want the EULA.)

     Most of all, though, I want people to have fun. If you really like
Escape, write me! I want to hear! (maybe it will even help me get into
college!) If you make any good levels, e-mail them to me! I won't try
to make you feel guilty for not registering, I promise. =)

               Legal stuff:

     The term "this program" or "the program" refers to Escape. Escape is
considered a package, including all of the files in the archive. Also,
since I pulled this legal info out of Tomopoly, if I say "Tomopoly" I
mean "Escape".

     ESCAPE is distributed AS IS. Under no circumstances can Tom Murphy or
Mooseware Development be held responsible for any damages whether directly 
or indirectly related to this program or the use of this program. No
warranties or guarantees, express or implied, will be honored. The user
is responsible for use, misuse, or abuse of this program.

     This program is Copyright (c) 1996 Tom Murphy. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED!

               Distribution
               
This program may be freely distributed as long as no fee is charged, except
for the following conditions:

(1) Any registered version of this program or portions thereof cannot be
distributed in any way, shape, or form other than from Mooseware
Development to the person who registered the software. Registration is
NON-TRANSFERRABLE!

(2) This program CAN be distributed on pay online services such as America
Online or Prodigy as long as any fees are based on time spent online or on
a flat monthly fee. This program CANNOT be distributed on ANY service which
charges a fee per download.

(3) This program can only be distributed in its original form (the program,
the whole program, and nothing but the program). This means that additional
levels cannot be distributed inside the archive, nor modified graphics or
any other modifications. Distributing modified versions of Escape is a
Copyright violation.

(4) Escape can only be distributed through mail-order shareware catalogs
with the written consent of Tom Murphy.

(5) This program can be distributed on shareware CD-ROM if all the folowing
     conditions are met:
     1. Tom Murphy is sent written notification (through the Post office
     please) through certified mail or with a request for a reply.
     2. A copy is made available for purchase by Tom Murphy. If you want
     to be particularly generous you can send me a free copy. =)
     3. Information concerning the CD (price, name, distribution method,
     etc.) is also mailed to Tom Murphy.
     4. The price of the CD does not exceed $75 US.
     5. The CD contains other shareware programs.
     6. The original archive ESCAPE10.EXE is contained on the CD. The CD
     may also include the files uncompressed elsewhere, but the original
     file must be present. Write to me for information if you do not have
     the original archive.
     7. The CD makes it clear that the author recieves no money from the
     sale of the CD for his/her work, and explains the shareware concept.

(6) Levels created with Escaped by the user can be distributed freely,
however they cannot be sold.

     ‹‹ ‹‹ ‹‹       
  ‹  €‹ €‹ €   ‹    Who would you like to thank?
     €‹ ‹€ €‹       

     Escape was written by one person? This is not true. The game itself
is my work, but many people helped create levels and gave me ideas.

     Overwhelmingly I'd like to thank my brother Mike Murphy for creating
nearly as many levels as I did and giving me many ideas for the game, as
well as Patricia Funtik and her sons, for creating several agonizing levels
which showed me that this game is sometimes even too hard for *ME*. They
also gave me many good suggestions on the game and were my official beta
testers. Thanks!

     I'd also like to thank the other people who helped make levels,
including the rest of my siblings and several of the kids from my Game
Builders class at the Eli Whitney Museum. Thanks!

The following people helped make levels for Escape:
(THANKS!)

     Tom Murphy 7 (Me!)
     Mike Murphy
     Brian Funtik
     Patricia Funtik (aka Lemmyn)
     Kevin Funtik
     Taylor Murphy
     Kerrigan Murphy
     Tom Piekos
     Jeff Bernadoni
     Abigail Gillis
     Evil Boy

     (If you made a level for the ORIGINAL version of Escape -- that is,
before it was released -- and your name is not listed above, write me or
give me a ring so I can straighten things out.)

 €€€€ﬂﬂ€ﬂﬂ€ﬂﬂ€€€€       
 €ﬂ€€ ﬂ€ ﬂ€ €€€ﬂ€   Just what do you want?
 €€€€ ﬂ€ﬂ € ﬂ€€€€             
 ﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂ   

 ˛ Levels! Make me some levels so I can get the Escape User Level Archive
started! Be infamous and have the deep satisfaction of other people getting
frustrated at your levels and wishing to kill you! For information on sending
levels to me, please see SENDLEV.TXT.

 ˛ Suggestions and comments! I want to hear how you like this game. Drop
me a mail message and help me get into college.

 ˛ Spoons! I am always looking for more spoons of any kind. Send them to:

Tom Murphy VII
The Spoon Campaign
339 Still Hill Rd.
Hamden, CT 06518.1830
USA

The official Thousand Spoons Web Page:
          http://members.aol.com/spoons1000/spoons.html

 - Tom Murphy.

 ImightbeTM@aol.com

     ‹‹ ‹‹ ‹‹       
  ‹  €‹ €‹ €   ‹    This is so long! Where are the appendices?
     €‹ ‹€ €‹       

     The following Appendices are for people having trouble with Escape
or for people who want to, basically, cheat. If you want to get the
full puzzle-solving experience, you should not read this.


 €€€€ﬂﬂ€ﬂﬂ€ﬂﬂ€€€€                                         ‹‹ ‹‹ ‹‹
 €ﬂ€€ ﬂ€ ﬂ€ €€€ﬂ€           ˛ Appendix 1 ˛             ‹  €‹ €‹ €   ‹  
 €€€€ ﬂ€ﬂ € ﬂ€€€€                                         €‹ ‹€ €‹    
 ﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂ   

                          Tile Descriptions

     You will notice that certain blocks can do certain things. Here is
a brief description of each block:

1. Floor (empty) - This can be walked on, shot over, etc.
2. Red block - This can be pushed by the guy in any direction. It can be
used to push down panels (see later), or block lasers (see later) but it
can't be pushed in holes (see later...)
3. Blue block - Can't be pushed, moved, anything. A wall.
4. Grey block - Same as a red block, but can be pushed into holes.
5. Green block - Can be moved one space in any direction, and then turns into
a blue block. Must be pushed onto a floor (#1).
6. Exit Door - The player must touch this to exit (win). There can be more
than one on any given level.
7. Hole - Blocks the player from moving, but doesn't block lasers. You can
push a grey block into the hole, and it (and the block) will disappear.
8. Gold Block - This block can be pushed from any side, and will keep moving
until it hits anything but a panel or regular floor. It can push down panels
if it lands on them, and can block lasers, but can't be pushed into holes.
9. Shooter - If the player walks onto a space aligned (vertically or
horizontally) with this tile, they will be shot with a laser and they'll
die. Lasers can be blocked by anything but panels, floors, holes, and
electric floors.
10. Panels (grey circle on floor) - When the player or a block is on top of
one of these, another block somewhere will disappear. When the player steps
off, or the block is removed, the block will reappear. You can do some
neat stuff with these (including screwing up the game); play around with
them.
11. Stop Sign - Usually used to signify a block which can be removed with
a panel, but it acts exactly the same as 3 (a stationary wall).
12-15. Arrows - These are walls, which can be used for decorative purposes
or to hint what is to be done in a level. Exactly the same as #3 except the
way they look.
New stuff:
16. Rough (bumpy grey) - These can be walked on like normal floors, and
lasers can shoot over them, but blocks cannot be pushed on them.
17. Electric floor (yellow floor) - This cannot be walked on, but if a
block is pushed onto it, the block will be disintegrated. These floors
are shut off by #18, and can be shot over by a laser.
18. Electric button (on) - Pressing (touching) this will turn it into
#19 and turn all the #17s into #1s. Cannot be shot over, walked on,
etc.
19. Electric button (off) This is simply the off version of #18. It acts
exactly the same as #3.
20. Transporter - Stepping on this tile will send you to another space on
the level. Blocks lasers, pushable blocks, etc. etc.
21. Breakable (cracked grey) - Touching this block will cause it to
disintegrate and disappear.
22, 23: Horizontal/Vertical sliders - These blocks can only be pushed
in the directions that their arrows point. They can be used to block lasers
but cannot push down panels or fill in holes.
24, 25: 0 and 1 buttons - When one of these is pressed, all of the
horizontal sliders will be turned into vertical sliders, and all of the
vertical sliders will be turned into horizontal sliders. 
26-31: Wires - These wires conduct pulses from #32 (buttons) to the lights
(33-35). They only conduct in certain directions (the directions which
the conduit points in... I guess this is pretty obvious.) They can be
pushed and act identically to red blocks.
32: Pulse button - Pushing this will send pulses in all 4 directions, which
can travel down wires to lights or directly to the lights themselves.
Cannot be moved, but blocks the lasers.
33-35: Blue, red and green lights - These blocks, when sent an electric
pulse, will toggle their respective floors between the 'high' and 'low'
positions. They cannot be activated on their own, and are otherwise
stationary and solid.
36, 38, 40: Blue, red and green 'high' floor - This is basically a wall.
You can't walk over it or shoot through it. It can be toggled to the 'low'
position by sending an electric impulse to the same color light.
37, 39, 41: Blue, red and green 'low' floor - Can be walked over and shot
over, but blocks can't be pushed on it. Can be toggled to 'high' floor.



     ‹‹ ‹‹ ‹‹                                         €€€€ﬂﬂ€ﬂﬂ€ﬂﬂ€€€€
  ‹  €‹ €‹ €   ‹            ˛ Appendix 2 ˛            €ﬂ€€ ﬂ€ ﬂ€ €€€ﬂ€ 
     €‹ ‹€ €‹                                         €€€€ ﬂ€ﬂ € ﬂ€€€€             
                                                      ﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂ   
                         Tutorial Walkthrough

     If you are still having trouble with the game, you get one more
chance. Here is an entire walkthrough of the tutorial, which explains
how each of the tiles work and why they do certain things. You're on
your own after this.

     Tutorial 1: Blocks

     This one is rather self explanatory. I guess I shouldn't even
bother, but here is what you do:

4 up, 3 right, 2 down, 3 right, push up, then 4 up, 8 right, 3 down,
1 right, touch exit.

     Nothing special happens with the tiles in this one, so see the
tile list in Appendix 1.

     Tutorial 2: Holes

     Here you are introduced to holes. You can't walk over holes, but
you can get rid of them by pushing a grey block onto them.

3 up, 2 right, 3 down, 9 right, 5 up, 1 right, push down 4, 1 left,
1 down, push right 2, 1 left, 4 up, 1 right, push down 3, 1 left, 1
down, right 3, touch exit.

(Basically you are pushing the two grey blocks on the right down and into
the holes blocking the exit. You can test the reactions of other blocks
(none) with the holes in the center, but you don't need them at all.)

     Tutorial 3: Lasers

     This tutorial introduces you to lasers. Lasers shoot you and kill
you if you step in front of them. Unless, of course, there is something
blocking their path, like, a block.

10 right, 1 up, 1 right, 2 up, 1 left, push up 1, 1 right, 1 up, 3 left,
1 down, 1 left, 1 up, 1 right, 1 up, push red block left 6 (so it
is lined up with the laser on the top), 1 down, 3 left, up 2, touch exit.

(You are pushing the grey block in front of the laser at the bottom of
the screen, then pushing the red on in front of the laser at the top.)

     Tutorial 4: Panels

     Panels are the grey circles on the floor. Stepping on them or pushing
(some) blocks onto them will cause a tile somewhere else to change. The
change is from whatever was there to "empty". Stepping off or removing
the block will change it back. Two panels can point to the same spot, in
which case pressing both of them will be the same as pressing none of them.

3 up, 3 right, push yellow right, 4 up, 4 right, push grey down 3, 2 left,
3 down, 1 right, push red up 1, 2 down, 8 right, touch exit.

(You are pushing blocks onto the bottom 3 panels, which removes the stop
signs blocking your way to the exits. Try pushing and stepping on the
panels to get the hang of it.)

     Tutorial 5: Rough

     Rough is the same as the floor, except blocks can't be pushed onto
it.

2 up, 9 right, 1 up, push grey up 2, 1 right, 1 up, push grey left 7, 1
down, 1 left, push grey up 1, 4 down, 6 right, 2 down, 1 right, push
grey up 1, 1 left, 1 up, push grey right 3, 1 down, 1 right, push grey
up 2, 1 right, 1 up, push grey left 3, 1 down, 1 left, push grey up 2,
1 right, 1 up, push grey left 7, 1 down, 1 left, push grey up 1, 1 right,
1 up, push grey left 1, touch exit.

(You are pushing the two grey blocks through the path in the rough, up
to the holes blocking the exit)

     Tutorial 6: Electric

     Before you cheat: Don't shut off the electricity immediately.

     Electric floor (bright yellow floor) will disintegrate most blocks
that you push into it. You shut off the electricity by pressing the button
that says "ON".

11 right, push grey left 2, 13 left, 4 up, push grey up 1, press left, 5
down, 14 right, touch exit.

(You push the grey block at the bottom into the electricity, then you
press the button on the left wall to shut the electricity off)

     Tutorial 7: Transports

     Before you cheat: Don't shut off the electricity immediately.

     Transports send your character to a different spot on the level.

12 right, 1 up into transporter, 1 down, 5 left, 1 up, push grey left 1,
2 right, 2 down, 1 down into transporter, 3 right, press down, 5 right,
1 up into transporter, 1 down, 5 left, 1 up, 2 left, touch exit.

(You are taking the transporter on the right (the one on the bottom kills
you) getting rid of the grey block by the exit as with tutorial 6, taking
the transporter at top, shutting off the electricity, and then transporting
back)

     Tutorial 8: Broken

     Broken blocks disappear when you touch them.

3 left, press left, 1 left, 3 down, touch left, 3 left, 1 up, 6 left, 1 up,
touch up, 1 down, 3 right, 2 up, 1 left, push grey left 2, 2 left, touch
exit.

(You are disintegrating the broken block in between the grey one and the
hole, then pushing the grey one into the hole. You can experiment with
the thing in the middle and see if you can get to the top right corner,
but this is not needed)

     Tutorial 9: Sliders

     Sliders can be pushed only in the direction that their arrows point.
Pressing the "0" and "1" buttons will toggle their direction.

1 down, 7 left, press down, 7 right, 2 up, push slider up 1, 1 down, 2
left, push slider up 2, 2 down, 1 left, push slider up 3, 3 down, 3
left, push grey left 1, 5 up, 1 left, touch exit.

     Tutorial 10: Wires 1

     Before you cheat: You can push the wires around like blocks.

     Wires are a bit complicated, and tutorials 10 and 11 give some people
trouble. The pinkish blocks with the yellow/black borders are buttons. The
buttons send pulses of electricity out in 4 directions when pressed. The
electricity flows through wires to the 'lights', which are the colored (red,
green, or blue) blocks with yellow/black borders. When the electricity
hits a light, it toggles the respective colored floor between the 'high'
and 'low' states. When it is 'high', a grey square appears in the center,
and you cannot walk over it. When it is 'low', it can be walked over.

1 right, 2 up, press up, 2 right, press up, 2 right, press up, 1 down,
7 right, 1 up, push wire up 1, 1 left, press up, 3 down, 3 right, touch
exit.

(You are pressing the buttons on the left to make your way through the
colored floor bits. Pay attention to how the buttons are connected to
the lights so you can see how it is done. Then you push the wire segment
between the button and red light on the right to clear the floor by the
exit)

     Tutorial 11: Wires 2

     This one causes the most problems.

     Before you cheat: There is a switch on the bottom, by the exit.
Everyone misses that one for some reason.

     Since the button sends out pulses which toggle the states of the
floor, and there are 2 states, sending 2 pulses will reset the floor
back to the way it was. Sending 3 pulses is the same as sending 1
pulse. Get it?

2 right, 2 up, push wire up 1, 1 left, push up, 1 left, 3 up, 1 right,
push wire right 1, 2 left, 2 down, push right, 4 down, 11 right, 3 up,
2 right, 3 up, push wire left 1, 3 down, 2 left, push up, 3 down,
1 right, push down, 4 right, touch exit.

(You are touching the button in the middle on the left (connected to
the blue light) once, pushing the wires in place to connect it to the
red light, then pushing the button again. Then you're walking through
the bottom, pushing the wire in the top right into place, pushing the
button, and then pushing the button on the bottom)

You're done! Now try playing the REAL levels. And no help from me for
those!

Documentation Copyright (c) 1996 Tom Murphy.
