
Should be possible to make an elevator if the physics are done right;
imagine that the top edge of the elevator floor is mapped exactly to
whatever pixel is the area source (say the bottom of the player's feet),
but up a single pixel. Now it moves itself into that space, which pushes
the player up one pixel, which continues indefinitely.
... note that if you jump, the elevator floor will follow you.

... Probably possible to make a "launcher" where the floor follows you
up, but backs off.


If objects on the screen would interfere with one another, should that
prevent the player from moving into that area? Could make all sorts of
puzzles with this, but maybe it would be too confusing.
(Could just be a certain kind of wall, like a different color?)


Monster that is a segment attached to the walls, traveling along it.
Can destroy it by splitting it in two, or crushing it?


Rather than use the player's center (or foot or whatever) as the
locus that determines the world state, this could be controlled by
some powers, maybe letting the player switch between different modes.
For example:
  - A pixie that flies around the player in a slow circle.
  - A ghost that the player can leave in place for a while.
  - Soul beam that the player can shoot in a slow straight line.
  - A physics object

Would be a good game to have music gradients. For example, write four
songs, one for each vertex of a square (maybe this square is the whole
world map). As the player moves within the square, the music is a
synchronized mix of the four tracks. (If the map has a loop structure,
could be a very fun composition challenge: Make each pair of songs
make sense, but change the meaning.)

"Why didn't I bring climbing shoes?"

Destination of adventure is a powerful magnet (etc.), causing screen
interference.

Some object-areas linkages can be "driven" - meaning that if the vertex
is contained inside a convex hull where the coordinates are defined,
then we can just compute that vertex to be whatever it would be just by
interpolating. Would have small errors due to integer round off, but
I think if we just have one "areas" per screen, this will be a common
need.
