handwritten-batch-oct18.fm2

  After tuning stuff for the threadripper 2. It got decently far
  ("ghost face and angels" boss after the second 3D level) and
  just spends years and years shooting angels.
  Died from BSOD. Uses contra.manual.objectives.

  NOTE: mframes in the subtitle is messed up here due to a bug
  (now fixed) where it was being stored in an int.

original-learnfun-oct21.fm2

  Using original learnfun-generated objectives. It's a little bit
  slower (probably spends significant time evaluating the objective
  function) but its per-mframe performance is terrible; overnight
  it only gets to the first "3D" level and struggles there even.

handwritten-position-oct21.fm2

  Back to the handwritten objectives, but only use the pure
  positional objective (level, screen, position). Gets stuck on
  the boss after the first 3D level, bleh. I think without a
  little hint of "score" it may have no incentive to do anything
  on these screens where progress is not apparent.
  
  So this is a good situation to try the marathon strategy.
  (Why do we think it'd be any better than score gradient?)

marathon-oct22.fm2

  First try with marathon node and strategy.
  Gets stuck on boss after first 3D level too.
  The marathon node didn't get any longer overnight, so it must
  be above the IsInControl threshold but nonetheless dead?

marathon-backup-oct23.fm2

  Changes:
    - Marathon node doesn't maximize score, just wants the deepest
      node over some score threshold (want to prevent hugging
      the RHS.) [But, maybe would be better to explicitly ignore
      player position for this? Or even just remove it from the
      objective funciton?!)

    - Possibility of popping the marathon node if we fail to
      extend it too many times.

  Gets stuck on the waterfall boss (arms). So, a bit of an
  improvement, but what's so hard about this boss?

marathon-flat-oct24.fm2

  Here, removed player position from objective function.
  Let this run almost 24h. Some extremely long stretches where it
  makes no progress: In these cases it's also hugging the right
  side of the screen. I guess this is happening not because
  we take position into account too much, but because random
  walks in the markov model are too likely to produce rightward
  movement.

  I guess it makes sense to say that we have a prior that most
  games are symmetric, and so we insert the reflection of the
  input sequence into the model as well?

marathon-flat-symmetric-oct25.fm2

  Same as previous but did make the model symmetric (P(L) = P(R)).
  It's easy to see that this is "working" because the players meander
  more, and this does help on some screens. But it gets stuck
  on the arms boss at the top of the waterfall.

