Manarags 2 quick documentation

   A few years ago I wrote an anagram-generating program called "Manarags"
(an anagram for 'anagrams' itself) in Quickbasic as a programming
challenge for myself and so that I could generate anagrams (which were
one of my wordly obsessions at the time, and perhaps still are). The
program worked but was frightfully slow and limited by the QB string space
of 32k. Over winter break when I was home and Really Bored, I decided I'd
rewrite the program in 32-bit C++... it was surprisingly simple to do
(I guess I have gotten better) and seems to be thousands of times faster.

   You might need a DOS extender to make this work; if it doesn't run try
getting this one: http://members.aol.com/spoons1000/pi/cwsdpmi.exe

   Source is free, and included in the file mana.cc.

   You will need the wordlist file, which should be called wordlist.asc.
You can edit this file as you wish to remove or add words, as long as
it loosely follows the format of the original. If the wordlist is not
alphabetically ordered, then the output will not be.

   To use manarags, invoke on the command line like so:

mana phraseforanagrammingwithoutspacesorpunctuation
  
   It's recommended that you redirect the output (which normally goes to
the console) to a file, thus:

mana lambdacalculus > lambda.txt

    However, if you are savvy with redirection you can do some fancy stuff,
especially with grep (and have it installed):

mana thomasmurphy | grep "trophy" > tom.txt

    Will print out only anagrams of thomasmurphy which have the word
"trophy" in them.

Switches:

-q          : quiet mode
-m 3        : minimum word length is 3
-b 150      : just print out the 150 biggest words and quit
-i poop.txt : use poop.txt as wordlist instead of wordlist.asc
-f vogon    : all anagrams must contain the word 'vogon'

This program is Copyright (c) 2001 Tom Murphy, but can be used,
distributed, and modified by anyone. This program comes with
absolutely no warranty.

Tom 7
http://members.aol.com/imightbetm/
http://www.andrew.cmu.edu/~twm/
